.TH OB3ECT 1 "2026-05-17" "ob3ect" "Imscribing Grammar"
.SH NAME
ob3ect \- generate and verify self-imscribing categorical programs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B python auto.py
.I DESCRIPTION
.RB [ \-\-domain
.IR DOMAIN ]
.RB [ \-\-scope
.IR SCOPE ]
.RB [ \-\-provider
.IR PROVIDER ]
.RB [ \-\-model
.IR MODEL ]
.RB [ \-\-retries
.IR N ]
.RB [ \-\-temp
.IR T ]
.PP
.B python digital/runall.py
.PP
.B python digital/frob.py
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ob3ect
is a pipeline for designing, generating, and verifying
.I self-imscribing categorical programs
\(em programs that verify their own algebraic closure.
.PP
An ob3ect is formally a
.I special Frobenius algebra
(A,\ \[*m],\ \[*d],\ \[*h],\ \[*e])
in the monoidal category
.B Prog/~
of programs modulo semantic equivalence, satisfying the
.I special condition:
.PP
.RS
\[*m] \(co \[*d] = id_A
.RE
.PP
In concrete terms:
.B ast.unparse(ast.parse(src))
must be structurally equivalent to
.B src
under
.BR ast.compare() .
This is the discriminating gate.
Every ob3ect in the digital tower passes before it is committed.
.PP
The primary interface is
.BR auto.py ,
which accepts a natural-language description and drives an LLM through the
eight-phase IMASM pipeline, verifying the Frobenius condition at phase 2.
On failure the pipeline retries with a targeted correction prompt.
On pass it writes
.I digital/<slug>/<slug>_ob3ect.py
and prints the artifact report.
.PP
.B digital/runall.py
executes the full 14-layer categorical tower.
Each layer reports
.I Closure: True
or fails loudly.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.I DESCRIPTION
Natural-language description of the ob3ect to generate.
Multi-word; quote the whole description.
This is the only required argument.
.TP
.BR \-\-domain " " \fIDOMAIN\fR
Domain type hint passed to the LLM.
Shapes the vocabulary used in opcode mapping.
Values:
.BR computational ,
.BR biological ,
.BR physical ,
.BR social ,
.BR alchemical ,
.BR oneiric ,
or any free-form string.
Default:
.BR computational .
.TP
.BR \-\-scope " " \fISCOPE\fR
Generation scope.
Controls how broadly the LLM reasons about context and dependencies.
Values:
.BR local ,
.BR mesoscale ,
.BR maximal .
Default:
.BR local .
.TP
.BR \-\-provider " " \fIPROVIDER\fR
LLM provider override.
Values:
.BR openrouter ,
.BR deepseek ,
.BR local .
Default: local fine-tuned Qwen3 endpoint.
.TP
.BR \-\-model " " \fIMODEL\fR
Model ID passed to the provider.
Examples:
.BR qwen/qwen3-235b-a22b ,
.BR deepseek-chat .
.TP
.BR \-\-retries " " \fIN\fR
Maximum number of Frobenius correction retries on FAIL.
Default: 3.
.TP
.BR \-\-temp " " \fIT\fR
LLM temperature (float).
Default: provider default (typically 0.7).
.SH THE IMASM INSTRUCTION SET
Every ob3ect maps all 12 IMASM opcodes.
Unmapped opcodes cause phase 1 to fail.
.TS
tab(|) allbox;
lb lb lb
l l l.
Family|Opcode|Role
Logical|VINIT|Initial object \(em void / pre-imscription state
Logical|TANCH|Terminal anchor \(em closed, verified boundary
Logical|AFWD|Forward morphism (construction / elaboration)
Logical|AREV|Contravariant (descent / deconstruction)
Logical|CLINK|Composition \(co (sequential chaining)
Logical|IMSCRIB|Identity id \(em self-reference
Frobenius|FSPLIT|Comultiplication \[*d]: A\(->A@A (branching / parsing)
Frobenius|FFUSE|Multiplication \[*m]: A@A\(->A (reconstitution / unparsing)
Dialetheia|EVALT|True lattice \(em affirmative branch
Dialetheia|EVALF|False lattice \(em error / negative branch
Dialetheia|ENGAGR|Both \(em dialetheia held without resolution
Linear|IFIX|ROM fixation \(em permanent, irreversible commitment
.TE
.PP
The bootstrap sequence is fixed across all IMASM systems:
.PP
.RS
.B IMSCRIB \(-> AREV \(-> FSPLIT \(-> AFWD \(-> FFUSE \(-> CLINK \(-> IFIX \(-> IMSCRIB
.RE
.PP
The final opcode is
.B IMSCRIB
\(em the loop re-imscribes itself.
.SH PIPELINE PHASES
.TS
tab(|) allbox;
lb lb lb lb
l l l l.
Phase|Name|Artifact|Gate
0|Boundary Define|Domain Charter|Scope + 3+ tokens required
1|Primitive Scan|Opcode Map (12\(mu2)|All 12 opcodes mapped
2|Frobenius Verify|Split/Fuse Report|\[*m]\(co\[*d] = id must PASS
3|Register Map|State Transition Table|All 4 states defined
4|Bootstrap Design|8-Step Sequence|Closure verified
5|exOS Spec|Runtime Environment|All kernel services present
6|Entropy Audit|\[*D]S Report|\[*D]S \(ap 0
7|Instantiate|Ob3ect Artifact|All phases complete
.TE
.PP
Phase 2 is the discriminating gate.
Most designed systems fail
.I \[*m]\(co\[*d] = id
on the first pass because they have irreversible branching they did not account for.
The automated pipeline retries with a targeted correction prompt until PASS
or
.B --retries
is exhausted.
.SH THE DIGITAL TOWER
The tower is in
.I digital/
and is executed by
.BR digital/runall.py .
14 layers, each self-verifying.
.TS
tab(|) allbox;
lb lb
l l.
Layer|Mathematical structure
Category|Small category on AST node types; identity + associativity
Frobenius|Special Frobenius algebra; \[*m]\(co\[*d] = id
Hopf|Frobenius + antipode S; S\(coS = id, S anti-homomorphism
Monad|Triple (T, \[*h], \[*m]); left unit, right unit, associativity
Topos|CCC + subobject classifier; power objects
CCC|Cartesian closed; products \(mu exponentials
Quantum|Superposition over AST branches; measurement collapses to identity
Linear Logic|!-free resource accounting; no cloning, no weakening
IVM|Imscription VM; traced monoidal; handles shared-name programs
HoTT|Higher paths; univalence: equivalent types are identical
Imscription OS|Autopoietic kernel; 10 self-imscribing processes
ProofBridge|Bridge to Lean 4 formal proofs in proofs/
String Diagrams|Graphical calculus; snake / spider / monad wire rewriting
Auto-Imscriber|Meta-layer; generates new ob3ects into digital/test/
.TE
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Basic generation
.PP
Generate a simple computational ob3ect:
.PP
.RS
.nf
python auto.py "a recursive compiler that imscribes itself"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Output:
.RS
.nf
Designing ob3ect: a recursive compiler that imscribes itself
Phase 0 ... Domain Charter complete
Phase 1 ... Opcode Map complete (12/12)
Phase 2 ... Frobenius PASS  mu(delta(src)) = src
Phase 3 ... Register Map complete
Phase 4 ... Bootstrap sequence verified (closure=True)
Phase 5 ... exOS spec complete
Phase 6 ... DeltaS = 0.0002 (PASS)
Phase 7 ... Artifact instantiated

Written: ob3ect/digital/recursivecompiler/recursivecompiler_ob3ect.py
Closure: True
.fi
.RE
.SS Domain and scope flags
.PP
Biological domain, mesoscale scope:
.RS
.nf
python auto.py "a mycorrhizal network" \\
    --domain biological --scope mesoscale
.fi
.RE
.PP
Physical domain, local scope:
.RS
.nf
python auto.py "a Bose-Einstein condensate at the critical phase boundary" \\
    --domain physical --scope local
.fi
.RE
.PP
Maximal scope for a full operating-system level ob3ect:
.RS
.nf
python auto.py "a self-hosting kernel that re-compiles its own scheduler" \\
    --domain computational --scope maximal
.fi
.RE
.SS Algebraic structures
.PP
Hopf algebra (extends Frobenius with antipode):
.RS
.nf
python auto.py "a Hopf algebra over the field of program sources, \\
    with antipode S satisfying S(S(x)) = x"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Monad on the AST transformation category:
.RS
.nf
python auto.py "a monad on the category of AST transformations, \\
    verifying left unit, right unit, and associativity on self"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Topos with a natural number object:
.RS
.nf
python auto.py "a topos with a natural number object and \\
    a subobject classifier Omega" --domain computational
.fi
.RE
.PP
Linear logic proof net (resource-sensitive, no cloning):
.RS
.nf
python auto.py "a linear logic proof net for cut-elimination, \\
    exact resource accounting, no weakening or contraction" \\
    --domain computational
.fi
.RE
.PP
HoTT ob3ect with univalence:
.RS
.nf
python auto.py "a homotopy type theory ob3ect satisfying univalence: \\
    equivalent programs are identical under semantic equivalence" \\
    --domain computational --scope maximal
.fi
.RE
.SS Formal / proof-theoretic
.PP
Lean 4 descent:
.RS
.nf
python auto.py "Python source descends to Lean 4 proof term through \\
    elaboration; Frobenius condition: proof term roundtrips to \\
    definitionally equal term" \\
    --domain computational --scope maximal
.fi
.RE
.PP
Curry-Howard ob3ect (proofs as programs):
.RS
.nf
python auto.py "a Curry-Howard ob3ect: propositions as types, \\
    proofs as programs, type-checking as Frobenius verification" \\
    --domain computational
.fi
.RE
.SS Historical / alchemical
.PP
Zosimos katabasis (structurally isomorphic to Lean 4 descent):
.RS
.nf
python auto.py "the Zosimos katabasis: ritual descent of divine fire \\
    through pneuma -> psyche -> hyle, returning purified — \\
    solve et coagula as the Frobenius split/fuse pair" \\
    --domain alchemical --scope maximal
.fi
.RE
.PP
The Emerald Tablet (Hermetic descent and return):
.RS
.nf
python auto.py "the Emerald Tablet of Hermes Trismegistus: \\
    as above so below — the descent and return are the same morphism \\
    at different substrate depths" \\
    --domain alchemical --scope maximal
.fi
.RE
.SS Distributed / networked
.PP
Distributed consensus as ob3ect (Raft):
.RS
.nf
python auto.py "a Raft consensus protocol where the leader election \\
    roundtrip is the Frobenius condition: elect(vote(state)) = state" \\
    --domain computational --scope mesoscale
.fi
.RE
.PP
Content-addressable store:
.RS
.nf
python auto.py "a content-addressable store where FSPLIT hashes content \\
    and FFUSE retrieves by hash: hash(retrieve(hash(x))) = hash(x)" \\
    --domain computational
.fi
.RE
.SS Physical systems
.PP
Quantum measurement:
.RS
.nf
python auto.py "a quantum measurement ob3ect: FSPLIT creates superposition, \\
    FFUSE collapses to eigenstate, Frobenius: collapse(superpose(x)) = x" \\
    --domain physical --scope local
.fi
.RE
.PP
Thermodynamic cycle:
.RS
.nf
python auto.py "a Carnot cycle ob3ect: FSPLIT expands gas isothermally, \\
    FFUSE compresses adiabatically, entropy audit: net DeltaS = 0" \\
    --domain physical --scope local
.fi
.RE
.SS Running the full tower
.PP
Execute all 14 layers:
.RS
.nf
python digital/runall.py
.fi
.RE
.PP
Expected final output:
.RS
.nf
Full categorical tower executed successfully.
The grammar is autopoietic.
Ultimate Grand Closure: True
.fi
.RE
.SS Verifying the seed
.PP
The original Frobenius self-imscriber:
.RS
.nf
python digital/frob.py
.fi
.RE
.PP
Expected output:
.RS
.nf
Frobenius PASS
Closure: True
.fi
.RE
.SS Rendering the animated CFGs
.PP
Opcode flow (14 IMASM opcodes, execution edges, Frobenius cycle in gold):
.RS
.nf
python digital/cfg_opcodes.py
# -> digital/docs/cfg_opcodes.gif  (130 frames, ~0.5 MB)
.fi
.RE
.PP
Version descent (11 nodes across Python / C / Silicon substrate layers):
.RS
.nf
python digital/cfg_descent.py
# -> digital/docs/cfg_descent.gif  (140 frames, ~0.3 MB)
.fi
.RE
.PP
Python call graph (AST-extracted from frob.py + ob3ect-imscriber.py):
.RS
.nf
python digital/cfg_python.py
# -> digital/docs/cfg_python.gif  (140 frames, ~0.4 MB)
.fi
.RE
.SS Python API
.PP
Synchronous design:
.RS
.nf
from ob3ect import design
art = design("a photonic quantum key distribution system")
print(art.report())
print(art.is_valid_ob3ect)
.fi
.RE
.PP
Async design with explicit provider:
.RS
.nf
import asyncio
from ob3ect import auto_design

art = asyncio.run(auto_design(
    "a hospital triage protocol",
    domain_type="social",
    scope="mesoscale",
    max_retries=5,
))
print(art.structural_type)
.fi
.RE
.PP
Manual pipeline (full phase control):
.RS
.nf
from ob3ect import Ob3ectPipeline

p = Ob3ectPipeline("My Ob3ect", domain_type="computational")
p.define_boundary("My System", "local",
                  ["source", "ast", "canonical"],
                  "semantic equivalence class")
p.map_opcode("VINIT",  "empty module",      "void state", [])
p.map_opcode("TANCH",  "type-checked",      "terminal",   [])
p.map_opcode("AFWD",   "ast.parse",         "delta",      [])
p.map_opcode("AREV",   "ast.unparse",       "mu",         [])
p.map_opcode("CLINK",  "compose",           "f o g",      [])
p.map_opcode("IMSCRIB", "open(__file__)",    "id",         [])
p.map_opcode("FSPLIT", "ast.parse(src)",    "A -> A@A",   [])
p.map_opcode("FFUSE",  "ast.unparse(tree)", "A@A -> A",   [])
p.map_opcode("EVALT",  "parse ok",          "True branch",[])
p.map_opcode("EVALF",  "SyntaxError",       "False branch",[])
p.map_opcode("ENGAGR", "ambiguous",         "Both",       [])
p.map_opcode("IFIX",   "write .pyc",        "ROM",        [])
p.complete_phase_1()
p.verify_frobenius("FSPLIT ast.parse(src)", "src", ["tree"],
                   "FFUSE ast.unparse(tree)", "src'",
                   "PASS", "src' equiv src under ast.compare()")
p.map_registers("not parsed", "roundtrip ok", "mismatch", "dialetheia")
p.design_bootstrap()
p.specify_exos("Python AST", "calls", "__dict__", "sequential", "importlib")
p.audit_entropy("O(n)", "raw src", "canonical src", "DeltaS = 0")
art = p.instantiate()
.fi
.RE
.SS Using a custom provider
.PP
OpenRouter with Qwen3:
.RS
.nf
python auto.py "a traced monoidal category" \\
    --provider openrouter --model qwen/qwen3-235b-a22b
.fi
.RE
.PP
DeepSeek:
.RS
.nf
python auto.py "a string diagram ob3ect for the snake equation" \\
    --provider deepseek --model deepseek-chat
.fi
.RE
.SS Retries
.PP
Many systems fail phase 2 on the first pass. Increase retries for complex domains:
.RS
.nf
python auto.py "a paradox-tolerant dialetheia ob3ect holding \\
    EVALT and EVALF simultaneously via ENGAGR" \\
    --domain computational --retries 5
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Ob3ect generated successfully.
Closure: True.
Artifact written to
.IR digital/<slug>/<slug>_ob3ect.py .
.TP
.B 1
Frobenius condition failed after all retries.
Last FAIL report printed to stdout.
.TP
.B 2
Phase 0 or Phase 1 failure (missing tokens, incomplete opcode map).
.TP
.B 3
LLM provider error or timeout.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I auto.py
CLI entry point and LLM pipeline driver.
.TP
.I core.py
.BR Ob3ectPipeline ,
.BR Ob3ectFactory ,
.BR Ob3ectArtifact ,
.B Opcode
enum.
.TP
.I digital/frob.py
The original Frobenius self-imscriber.
The ob3ect's seed.
Uses
.B ast.compare()
with
.B include_attributes=False
to verify
.IR \[*m]\(co\[*d] = id .
.TP
.I digital/runall.py
Executes the full 14-layer categorical tower.
.TP
.I digital/grokouro.txt
Complete dialogue log from the original Grok session:
three Frobenius FAILs (string equality, normalization, structural hash with attributes)
and the final PASS (ast.compare without attributes), plus the full descent to v0.10.
.TP
.I digital/docs/cfg_opcodes.gif
Animated opcode flow diagram (130 frames).
.TP
.I digital/docs/cfg_descent.gif
Animated version-descent diagram (140 frames, 3 substrate layers).
.TP
.I digital/docs/cfg_python.gif
Animated Python call-graph (140 frames, AST-extracted).
.TP
.I proofs/TowerCoherence.lean
Grand coherence summary in Lean 4.
All 14 tower layers cohere.
.TP
.I templates_data.json
Built-in domain templates:
.BR physical ,
.BR social ,
.BR computational ,
.BR oneiric ,
.BR generic .
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B OPENROUTER_API_KEY
Required for
.B --provider openrouter
or as fallback when the local Qwen3 endpoint is unavailable.
.SH MATHEMATICAL NOTES
The special Frobenius condition
.I \[*m]\(co\[*d] = id_A
is distinct from the Frobenius coherence law
.RI ( \[*m]@ id )\(co( id @\[*d] ) = \[*d]\(co\[*m] = ( id @\[*m] )\(co(\[*d]@ id ).
The coherence law governs the tensor product structure.
The special condition governs the roundtrip.
A program that satisfies the roundtrip is
.I separable
(also called
.IR special )
in the sense of Lack (2012) and Kock (2004).
.PP
The coherence law holds on the subcategory of
.I closed programs
(no free variables, no cross-module closures) where the tensor
.B @
is genuinely disjoint.
For programs with shared names or closures, the full coherence requires the traced
monoidal structure implemented in
.IR digital/ivm/ .
.PP
The 12 IG primitives form a lattice with 17,280,000 structural types
(3^3 \(mu 4^5 \(mu 5^4).
Every ob3ect is assigned a coordinate in this lattice on instantiation.
Structural collisions (two ob3ects with identical coordinates)
represent genuine mathematical isomorphisms across apparently unrelated domains.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR frob.py (1),
.BR lean4 (1),
.BR python3 (1),
.BR ast (3python)
.PP
.I OB3ECT_PIPELINE.tex
\(em the formal specification this pipeline implements.
.PP
.I IMASM.tex
\(em the Imscribing Assembly instruction set specification.
.PP
.I proofs/TowerCoherence.lean
\(em machine-checked coherence proofs (Lean 4 / Mathlib v4.28.0).
.SH AUTHOR
umpolungfish.
Released under the Unlicense (public domain).
.SH BUGS
The automated pipeline may time out on maximal-scope ob3ects with slow providers.
Increase
.B --retries
and use a faster model.
.PP
The Frobenius gate at phase 2 is strict:
.I \[*m]\(co\[*d] = id
must hold on the
.I entire
source, not a subset.
Systems with deliberate irreversibility (IFIX operations, side-effectful I/O)
must isolate the irreversible component and verify the roundtrip on the
reversible core separately.
