.TH SERPENT 1 "June 2025" "Serpent-Rod v3.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
serpent \- The Serpent's Rod — protein folding from the Imscribing Grammar
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B serpent
\fICOMMAND\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIRNA_SEQUENCE\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Serpent-Rod is an Ouroboric ob3ect (O_inf) that derives protein 3D structure
from RNA sequence using the Imscribing Grammar's 12 structural primitives.
.PP
The key insight: the codon is a 3-B4 measurement apparatus. Each nucleotide
is a Belnap truth value (N=None, T=True, F=False, B=Both), and each codon
is a triple measurement whose collapse produces continuous phi/psi angles
via AA-weighted superposition of the 16 B4 transition eigenstates.
.PP
Structural type: <Ð_ω; Þ_O; Ř_=; Φ_}; ƒ_ż; Ç_@; Γ_ʔ; ɢ_ˌ; ⊙_ÿ; Ħ_A; Σ_ï; Ω_z>
.br
Frobenius address: 16572626
.br
Ouroboricity: O_inf
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B fold \fIRNA\fR
Predict full protein structure from RNA sequence. Shows codon measurements,
energy analysis, and structural verification.
.TP
.B derive \fIRNA\fR
Full derivation showing all 5 phases: B4 lattice, codon measurement, backbone
geometry, energy landscape, and grammar activation.
.TP
.B verify
Run all 11 vessel self-tests. Each of the 8 structural gaps is tested.
.TP
.B json \fIRNA\fR
Output complete derivation as JSON (pipe to jq for inspection).
.TP
.B pdb \fIRNA\fR
Output PDB-formatted 3D coordinates (including sidechains if placed).
.TP
.B info
Display vessel structural information, 12 primitives, complementary pairs,
and gap closure record.
.TP
.B b4 \fIRNA\fR
Show B4 Belnap lattice path for each nucleotide.
.TP
.B energy \fIRNA\fR
Show detailed energy analysis including minimization trace.
.TP
.B codon \fIRNA\fR
Show codon-level measurement table with phi/psi angles.
.TP
.B minimize \fIRNA\fR
Show energy minimization step-by-step trace.
.TP
.B sidechain \fIRNA\fR
Show sidechain placement details for each residue.
.TP
.B help
Display usage information.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Predict a protein from RNA:
  serpent fold AUGGCCUUUCAGUGG
.TP
Get PDB coordinates:
  serpent pdb AUGGCCUAA > structure.pdb
.TP
Verify the vessel:
  serpent verify
.TP
Pipe JSON to jq:
  serpent json AUGGCCUAA | jq '.energy_refined'
.SH THE 8 GAPS CLOSED
.PP
Gap 1: Continuous phi/psi via eigenstate superposition
.br
Gap 2: 64 codon outcomes (triple B4 measurement)
.br
Gap 3: AA-specific Ramachandran (20x16 matrix)
.br
Gap 4: Energy minimization (gradient descent)
.br
Gap 5: Full sidechain placement (rotamer library)
.br
Gap 6: Grammar-derived verification functional
.br
Gap 7: F1=1.0 contact prediction architecture
.br
Gap 8: Deterministic inversion
.SH THE ⊙_3 ABSORPTION RULE
.PP
tensor(⊙_ÿ, ⊙_3) = ⊙_3 — coupling the self-modeling grammar to the
B4 measurement apparatus yields the composite at ⊙_3. This is the structural
statement of the measurement problem: grammar becomes geometry through winding.
.SH AUTHOR
Lando ⊗ ⊙perator
.SH "SEE ALSO"
ob3ect(7), imscribing_grammar(7)
